Welcome back to the course in Python programming.
In today's tutorial we going to learn how to create violin plots and then we'll compare them to box
plots and understand the pros and cons.
All right let's get started.
So as with something is in Seaborn and Python violin plots are very very straightforward and simple to create
all we have to do is say sns.violinplot data equals movies X equals genre and y equals
critic rating. Voila,  violin plot is already as quick as that.
And what are you going to do is we just going to copy that.
And that's before because we're talking about box or just put it above let's say W and here we're
going to replace violin plot with boxplot because the function call is exactly the same.
You're on that.
There's your boxplot or our boxplot.
And if I zoom out a bit let's have a look and try to see what they're telling us.
So we've got a genre at the bottom or certain genres we've got action adventure comedy drama horror
romance and Thriller.
And here we've got the critic rating so how is the critic creating distributed across different
across different genres.
What does a boxplot tell you.
boxplot tells you.
All right so that's you know this first quarter that's your second quarter middle that's your third
quarter that's your top right and outliers are excluded.
So here we don't see that those are usually specified as separate dots.
And so here for instance you can see that in horror movies the critic ratings are generally low
the median here is about 22 and generally so it's the lowest median that you have out of all of them.
And the highest median you've got for thrillers somehow thrillers are getting the best critic ratings
according to these box plots.
Not always but generally speaking the median here is much higher than here.
But two similar box plus you've got comedy and drama which is drama is a bit higher than comedy.
So you can kind of tell that.
Let's say hypothetically if you're creating a movie and you create an average type of movie so you don't
have a very great idea for the movie the plot isn't this kind of everything is about average the budget
is average everything is average then.
Which is the best type of movie to create if you create a horror movie then you are more likely than
not to end up over here with a 25 out of 100 critic rating If on the other hand you create a thriller
you are more likely than not to have a 65 or 70 or 100 critic rating.
So basically all else being equal if you're creating an average type of movie without anything unique or
special about it then it's better to create a thriller than a horror movie.
That's kind of like a very quick and rough or rugged inside out of this of a charter of box plots.
Just an example how you would use box plots but definitely you can get more insights out of here especially
if you want to compare two different genres side by side if you want to compare action versus comedy
you can see that their median is quite about the same but the box plot for comedy is a bit more stretched
out than for action.
And what does that mean it's more likely that you will be further away from the media and in the comedy
whereas here it's a bit more compact.
So the violinplot tells us pretty much the same thing but it has a bit different characteristics.
For example here you can see the width and the width tells you the number of points that fall into that
certain area something you can see from the boxplot,  boxplot kind of tries to tell you that through
the core tiles so tell you it tries to split up your data into core tiles.
So basically looking at box plot you would know that between here the this point and this point there
is about a quarter of the observations you'll find a core of observations in between here and here you'll
find a quarter of observations here and here another quarter and here and here another quarter.
So basically this part is longer but it contains the same observations as this part.
Meaning that there's more observations here.
Well a violent plot shows you the same thing but it shows it to you in a bit more of a visual manner
so instead of trying to remember that when the part is smaller that means more dots fall and they're
more observant and you can actually see by the width you can see that the width is telling you that there's
more observations that can be found here.
Same thing more observations here than in the top part which you can also tell from the box plot.
And then here you can see that this is a bit of a tricky one here it's wider it's wider and it's wider
again whereas that's something you can really tell from the box plot you can really tell that there is
a concentration of points here in the middle so sometimes violin plots do tell you a bit more.
And in fact I had a specific example.
It took me a while to find it and it will show us that box plots or violin plots can be a bit better than
boxplots some time so let's have a look at it.
All right.
It is.
It is in the drama section.
So if I'm going to take this and change it a bit so I'm going to say movies but I'm not going to take all
of movies I'm just going to filter them out.
Also movies with genre equals drama.
Same thing here.
So basically we're filtering our data set we're subsetting it.
But.
OK.
So here I want to change this by year so we're going to split it by year instead of by genre.
Let's copy thats and remove that again here.
I'm going to zoom in quickly.
So basically what I did is I'm creating a box plot for the subset a data set which only contains movies
in drama.
And then instead of genre I'm going to have the years on the x axis and still I'm going to look at critic
rating just let me quickly check that that's the one I want to be.
Yep that's the one we gonna be looking at critic rating so that zoom out the same thing for the violin plot
so far on that.
And then around that.
So what can we see from these two.
Comparing these two.
Well let's have a look at this box plot and the green box plot.
Right.
So even though the green boxplot is a bit more stretched out they look very similar.
So apart from the fact that those shots these two box plots look very similar but when you look at the
violin plots you'll see that they're a bit different.
So here you can see that it's smooth it goes up and then it goes down there's a bit of a hiccup over
here.
But generally it's quite smooth, this box this violin plot has is very different it's got two wider areas
so wide here and wide here so you can see that there's an evident concentration of points at this part
at this critic rating.
And at this critic rating whereas here there's one evident concentration of points and that is interesting
so that is something that violin plots can show you better than box plots.
Is those symmetrical type of concentration so when you have a concentration of points above and below
in a box plot it kind of evens out.
It kind of if as long as above and below the median it kind of evens out.
It doesn't pull the median up or down or anywhere whereas in a violin plot you can actually see it
.
So this is a very faint example of that phenomenon.
But you will definitely if you keep practicing with violin plots in your own data sets you will eventually
come across an example where a violin plot is can potentially give you much more insightful analytics
than a box plot.
At the same time what's why aren't violin plots that's used in analytics and it reports well because
box plots are a favorite of executive executives really.
Like for some reason box plots they're they're quite straightforward to understand it's Court-House
So once you get your head around the fact that one is longer that means when it's shorter that means there's
more density in there once you get your head around that it is pretty straightforward to use them whereas
violin plots they do have these weird shapes and not in all programming languages it's as easy as in
Python too or in Seaborn to create the violin plots.
So there you go.
now we've had a bit of a comparison between box plots and violin plots and hopefully you can understand
for yourself which ones you like more and which ones you would rather include in your reports and that's
all for today's tutorial.
I look forward See you next time.
Until then happy coding.